So momentarily we’re going to return to
the basic story.
I want to talk to you today about how your
brain organizes your perceptions, and then
I want to talk to you about how that’s represented
in mythology.
The first thing I’d like to point out, is
we talked about the difference between Darwinian
and Newtonian viewpoints a while back.
One claim that you might make if you were
Darwinian is that whatever your brain is adapted
to is reality.
That seems to be the central claim of Darwinian
evolution, is that you can’t define reality
any more accurately than that which selects.
I want to tell you about how I think the brain
is organized.
Then I want to show you, I hope, that the
way fundamental narratives work can be mapped
on to that brain structure.
To me that implies that there’s something
right about fundamental narratives, because
otherwise why would they map onto the brain
structures that have evolved to adapt us to
the environment?
People think about reality in objective terms,
and they think about it as decomposable into
tiny subunits.
I think that’s a limited viewpoint, a powerful
but limited viewpoint.
I think it’s much more realistic to assume
that whatever reality is, is more like a continual
interplay of very, very complex patterns.
I suppose you could make the case that those
patterns are ultimately made out of particles,
but even that’s not exactly true because
the particles have to be arrayed in space.
That’s part of the atomic theory is that
there’s not just subatomic particles and
atomic particles, but that they’re arrayed
in space.
If they’re arrayed in space, that means
the manner in which they’re arrayed can
be informative.
And if you reduce the phenoma to the particle,
without taking into account the patterning
of array of the particles, then there are
levels and levels and levels of information
that you lose.
Those levels of information are – they may
not be relevant for our physical understanding
of the make-up of atomic and subatomic particles,
but they’re definitely relevant to whether
we can walk across the street safely.
I would say if you’re related to reality
properly, the kind of information that you’re
processing is precisely the kind of information
that allows you to cross the street properly;
and to do all the other things during your
days, your weeks, your months that you have
to in order to stay alive and fundamentally,
in some sense, propagate.
Alright, so we’ll start with the neuropsychological
argument.
Now we’ve already established the idea that
these little frames of reference, or maps,
or stories, or whatever you call them – I’ll
call them stories from hereon in, are little
gold-directed units.
They’re units of conception and emotion
and perception and behavior; they’re little
sub-personalities.
The sub-personality has an initial starting
point and a destination point, and then it
implements behaviors to transform the starting
point into the destination point.
Then you might say, well what forms these
little sub-personalities?
The answer to that is very complex, but one
answer is: fundamental motivations.
I arranged the fundamental motivations on
this particular diagram pointing out that
you can roughly consider motivations, as those
that maintain you, and those that propagate
you.
Now it’s just a heuristic, it’s just a
way of thinking about it.
Under self-maintenance there’s thermal regulation,
thirst, hunger and elimination, and there’s
all sorts of other things as well, but those
will do for the time being.
Under self-propagation there’s affiliative
desire and sexual desire.
The things that’s quite interesting about
all of this is that there are brain structures
that underlie the manifestation of these fundamental
sub-personalities.
Now people tend to think about them either
as motivations or emotions, and I think that’s
another useful heuristic.
You can say that, roughly speaking, that a
motivation pops up an entire frame of reference
and emotion tends to orient you within that
frame of reference.
But that’s only a conceptual simplification,
because what you see when look at the actual
brain structures is that there isn’t an
emotion center – there are a bunch of micro-units
in the brain, and there are separable micro-units
for different emotions and different motivations
and they don’t necessarily have that much
in common in terms of their locale, except
that they tend to be relatively deep in the
brain.
Some are hypothalamic and some are in the
amygdala, and some are in the periaqueductal
grey, which seems to be responsible for pain
responses.
So we can classify things as motivations and
emotions, but it doesn’t map one-to-one
on the underlying brain structure.
Now I think what we’ll do with regards to
talking about the brain is we’ll start from
the bottom up.
It’s appropriate to start from the bottom
up because you are more dependent on your
ancient brain structures than you are on your
modern brain structures; in that, if you damage
your modern brain structures, and I mean relatively
modern, let’s say the ones that have really
evolved in great detail over the last two
million years, the cortical cap, in particular,
the prefrontal cortex, a lot of the visual
cortex.
If you damage that you can pretty much go
on.
Now you’re going to have one impairment
or another impairment, but you can still stay
alive.
However, there are structures that are lower
down that if you damage, that’s the end
of you.
So for example, the ascending reticular activating
system, which is the thing that wakes you
up when you’re asleep at night, when a noise
occurs that shouldn’t occur.
It seems to be the activating center for consciousness,
whatever that means.
It’s way deep down in the brain, it’s
way deep down at the top of the spinal cord,
roughly speaking.
If you twist your head in a car accident a
little bit too roughly, and you sheer off
the ascending fibers, and you’re in a coma
permanently, then nothing can wake you up.
That’s pretty interesting – to know that
consciousness, our tendency is to think about
that as a function of the higher cortical
systems, is dependent completely on something
that is unbelievably ancient.
So it begs the question, exactly what level
of neuronal complexity do you have to be before
you have sub consciousness?
The answer to that is, we don’t know.
The relationship between consciousness and
neuronal structure is insanely complex.
For example, you have very neuron-heavy structures
in your brain, like the cerebellum, which
has a very rough outer-coating like the cortex,
and it has about as many neurons as the cortical
sheet does.
Yet, you can take it out of people and they
don’t seem to show any impairment in consciousness,
but they get ataxic and they can’t control
their behavior that well.
They have a hard time guiding it – but that
seems to be more or less it.
Now it isn’t, because there are other things
that the cerebellum does, but my point is
that you can have massively neuron-heavy structures
that seem to be related in very minimal ways
to our experience of consciousness.
Your autonomic nervous system is sort of like
that – there are a lot of neurons in your
autonomic nervous system, but I think it’s
a mistake to say that we’re precisely conscious
of our autonomic nervous system; although
now and then we’re conscious of its outputs.
It governs the operation of our organs and
all the things that are so complex that we
aren’t allowed to mess with them as conscious
beings.
But it’s not conscious, and then somehow
some neurons are conscious.
I tell you, we don’t know anything about
consciousness.
We really don’t, we don’t have a clue.
I think it’s probably because we’re formulating
the question wrong.
There are people who are materialist reductionists,
and they believe that consciousness is an
emergent property of the underlying neuronal
function.
The problem with that philosophy is that it’s
predicated on the assumption that they understand
what the matter is that’s making up that
neuronal substrate.
I can tell you that by the time we’re able
to reduce consciousness to its underlying
material structure, we’ll think of whatever
matter is, in a way that’s completely different
than the way we think of it now.
So there might be an eventual reduction, but
at the same time there’s going to be a transformation
of the theories.
It’s clear that we don’t understand material
that well, particularly because when you go
down to the tiny underlying substructures
at the subatomic level it behaves in a very,
very peculiar manner.
So anyways, all bets are off in regards to
consciousness.
It also does seem to be something that’s
likely very ancient.
There are people who have attributed consciousness
to insects.
Insects, by the way, seem to go out of their
way to take hallucinogenic drugs, which is
quite interesting.
So the fly agaric, for example, is the famous
red and white mushroom that you always see
in fairy tales and in super Mario brothers.
It pops up everywhere.
Flies will come and take a bite of it and
they fall unconscious beside the mushroom
and they stay there for ten or fifteen minutes,
and then they get up, but they go eat it again.
Reindeer really like them too and they get
blitzed out of their mind on amanita muscaria.
There’s evidence for the desire to transform
states of consciousness, way, way down in
the animal kingdom, way farther than you’d
think.
So God only knows.
Then you think well a big brain is necessary,
but if you consider something like Irene Pepperberg’s
African Grey parrot, which died a couple of
years ago – a famous animal which could
speak better than a three year old kid.
It had a good vocabulary, more than five hundred
words, and it could put together meaningful
phrases.
It could speak better than a chimpanzee.
They use sign language of course.
This was one smart bird.
If you think about a bird, it has no brain,
a bird.
It’s got a brain about this big.
I know a bird isn’t very big, and that actually
makes a difference.
The fact that that much intelligence could
be compacted in that small of an area, means
as far as I’m concerned, that we don’t
really understand very much about how the
brain works.
We do understand some things, and most of
the things we understand have actually been
discovered by animal experimentalists.
Which is a useful thing to know.
Because of course there are a lot of people
who think that animal experimentation isn’t
a good idea, or that we could substitute computer
models – which is a spectacularly idiotic
theory.
Obviously if we had accurate computer models
we wouldn’t need to do the animal experimentation.
We’re not going to build a computer model
that’s better than our current understanding,
at least not yet; we may in the future.
Anyways you can think of the basic structures
that are producing these little sub-personalities
as the output of fundamental biological systems.
They’re either motivations or emotions.
The structure that appears to be most responsible
for this sort of thing, at least initially,
is the hypothalamus.
I should show you a little bit about the hypothalamus.
Just so you kind of have a sense of what it
is.
It’s not very big, and you’ll see in this
diagram that it sits right on top of the spinal
cord and the base part of the brain.
That’s just that little bitty area there.
It looks from the diagram it seems to be about
one percent of the entire brain mass or something
like that.
I think I mentioned to you before that if
you take a cat and you take all of its brain
off, except for the hypothalamus, roughly
speaking, as long as it’s a female cat in
a restrictive environment, it can pretty much
live a cat life; except that it’s hyper-exploratory.
Which I do think is quite remarkable, because
you’d think that it would just lay there
passively, since it doesn’t have a brain.
The hypothalamus, I’ll show you some more
pictures here of the hypothalamus, this is
a rat hypothalamus, and this is a diagram
from Larry Swanson, who’s a real genius,
and well-worth reading, although very complicated.
He’s a developmental neuro-anatomist, if
I remember correctly, and he’s interested
in how the brain unfolds across the course
of fetal development in all sorts of different
animals.
Assuming by doing that in part, you can track
the evolution, but you can also understand
the relationship between one brain part and
another.
What you see here, you see all of these little
sub-units of the hypothalamus, they’re indicated
in orange, green and black, and so the first
thing that you can see is the hypothalamus
is not one thing, it’s a bunch of ganglia,
I think is the correct name for the hypothalamic
sub-organs.
So, it’s called a hypothalamus sort of for
convenience sake, you can identify it anatomically
and it might be a good short-hand for a rough
description of the macrostructure of the brain,
but of course the problem with the brain is,
you know, it’s pattern one at this level
and it’s pattern two at this level, and
it’s pattern three at this level.
You can go a long ways down before you run
out of complexity.
A cell is an unbelievably complicated thing,
and you have, God only knows how many of those
things you have in your brain.
I don’t remember exactly what the latest
estimates are, but it’s in the hundreds
of billions.
Each of those cells is as complex as really
complex factory, and it’s full of these
little molecular machines and they’re doing
things that are so complicated and amazing,
you just can’t believe it when you – I’ve
seen computer animations of some of these
structures in operation, and the complexity
of what they do to take the DNA molecule apart,
and then to rebuild it little bit by little
bit, and to do error correction at the same
time, it just boggles the mind.
I cannot see how you can possibly account
for that using a straight, sort of Newtonian
deterministic model of clock ward behavior;
the stuff is so sophisticated.
It looks more like advanced robotics than
it does the interaction of tiny little molecules.
There are molecules that work with the DNA
that can walk, and as they walk they carry
other molecules, and not only can they walk,
they can walk over obstacles.
They’re like made out of ten molecules!
What’s going on?
It’s just beyond belief.
Okay, so all of these little nuclei in the
hypothalamus, they’re all doing slightly
different things, they’re radically different
things, although they have commonality in
function.
So, roughly what you could say is that one
half of the hypothalamus is devoted to popping
up little sub-personalities that are devoted
to the satisfaction of fundamental biological
requirements.
It’s not obvious what a fundamental biological
requirement is, because that’s a heuristic,
it’s not a category, it’s a fuzzy category,
but we can agree on some of its contents.
So of course thirst, hunger and the need to
breathe would be in there, and might also
add pain, and sexual desire and the need for
play, although that’s a separate circuit
and it’s not mediated by hypothalamic structures,
there’s a different circuit for play.
Play slash affiliation.
Roughly speaking what an animal basically
chases and requires on a day-today and week-to-week
basis is mediated in large part by the hypothalamus.
And the hypothalamus is also a crucial nexus
in the brain for identifying what’s going
on in the body and then telling the brain
what to do about it.
So for example the hypothalamus is the thing
that makes you hungry and the thing that makes
you thirsty.
It does that because it monitors levels of
substances such as sugar in your bloodstream,
and also the degree to which you’re hydrated.
You can sustain tiny little bits of damage
to the hypothalamus, which has unbelievably
extreme consequences.
So for example, if you get unlucky, you can
develop hyper aphasia or, uncontrollable thirst.
If that part of your hypothalamus is damaged,
people just can’t keep you away from water
supplies, you’ll just drink and drink and
drink and drink until you drown.
You can’t control it.
So the hypothalamus is no joke and hyperphagia
is the same thing, except in relationship
to food.
There have been reports of people who developed-
I knew a guy in Montreal, who used to work
at Harvard.
His name was Frank Irvin.
He did some of the earliest studies in the
world on the physiology of violent crime.
Frank had identified the role of epilepsy
as a progenator to violent crimes.
The defense rage circuit is part of the hypothalamus
and if you’re unlucky you can have a particular
form of epilepsy that will activate the defense
rage system.
I knew someone who had a seizure condition
like that.
Then they get uncontrollably aggressive.
Now this guy has quite an interesting story.
So it first happened to him when he was about
eighteen.
He was out drinking in a bar.
Now, alcohol lowers your seizure threshold.
So he’s out drinking in a bar and all of
a sudden he got up and tore his shirt off.
He was in an aggressive stance and backed
into the corner, and his friends were coming
towards him.
He told them to go away or I’ll hit you.
Now he was a very well socialized person,
so I think what happened is he went into this
defensive rage state, but because he was so
well socialized, he could tell people to stay
away from him, but he couldn’t stop himself
from hitting them and attacking them if they
got close enough.
So anyways, I believe at that point he slapped
a police officer who came to rescue him.
They took him to the hospital and on the way
there he hit his fingers against the hood
of the car and put dents in it, and then when
he got to the hospital – now I don’t remember
the particulars of this – but he picked
up a kidney bowl, which is like an enamel
covered steel bowl, and twisted it in a figure
eight.
It’s like, try that, it’s not so easy.
The next time it happened he was in another
bar, so what the hypothesis was then, was
that someone had spiked his alcohol with some
sort of drug, but that was never demonstrated.
He got off of all that because he had no record,
he was a perfectly peaceful person.
Then the next time it happened he was in another
bar, and he did the same thing.
He backed into the corner and he ripped off
his shirt, and he told me that when he was
looking, he looked down the hallway and all
he could see was fire.
A policewoman came to get him, because the
bar called the police, and he hit her.
Then after that he had EEG testing, which
showed that he was susceptible to seizures
so he swore off alcohol.
He never had another drink and he’s like
thirty-five now.
He never had another drink in his life and
it never happened again.
It’s just a good example of – there was
a kid at the University of Texas, at Austin,
about thirty years ago, who seemed to have
a perfectly reasonable family life and so
far, a reasonable upbringing, and he started
to become increasingly violent in his fantasies.
He climbed up onto the tower, because there’s
a high tower at the University of Texas at
Austin, and he took at high-powered rifle
and I think he shot sixteen people before
they finally got him.
When they did an autopsy, they found he had
a high-pressing tumor that was growing on
the hypothalamus.
The hypothalamus is no joke.
For those of you who’s introduction to neuropsychology
has made you assume that the cortex is in
control, let me tell you, the cortex is only
in control when all of your other basic requirements
are satiated.
Since you’re a modern person, and you live
in luxury, that’s unparalleled in the history
of the world, all of your fundamental biological
sub-personalities are always satiated.
That’s what you think you’re like.
You’re only like that because you’ve never
been anywhere where you weren’t like that.
So anyways, here’s one of the things that’s
cool about the hypothalamus.
The first thing is that you have these different
sub-systems, these different nuclei that are
responsible for these different sub-personalities.
Oriented towards sexuality, oriented towards
hunger, oriented towards thirst, oriented
towards temperature regulation, etc.
I think of them as sub-personalities because
they have a viewpoint, they want something
and they want to go somewhere, they want to
accomplish it efficiently, and they have emotions
that go along with it so, you know, if you’re
going for some water and you drop your glass,
or somebody gets in your way, or the tap isn’t
working, you’re going to feel frustration,
anxiety and irritation.
They come fulyl equipped with emotions, they
have their own motor outputs, so they basically
prime, and those would be the motor outputs
that are aggregations of habits that you have
been able to learn that have aided you previously
in your water-searching behavior.
So for us, that would be getting a glass out
of the cupboard, which is a gripping issue,
and a transport issue, and then you have to
turn on the tap.
Luria, who’s a famous Russian psychologist
called those things Kinetic Melodies.
If you think about it from a Piagetian perspective
and a Lurian perspective at the same time,
you think how Piaget talked about how children
put together basic – they’re not reflexes
exactly, they’re complex sequences of what
started as reflexes.
Then those can be linked together in a sort
of dance that you’re always doing with your
body.
Each of those little dances, you think water-seeking,
you’re going to have a set of water relevant
dances that you can do that your experiences
taught you to become an expert at.
When you get thirsty those are likely disinhibited.
That’s my guess, they’re disinhibited
and prepared for execution.
Then the specifics of the circumstance that
you’re in will determine which ones are
disinhibited enough to actually run.
It’s like you’re full of little machines
and they’re all on.
They’re ready to go, but they’re all held
in stasis in some sense by some cortical inhibition.
I like to think of the brain sort of like
a nuclear reactor.
The core is really active, it’s on, but
then you have all of these rods going into
the core to keep it from going critical.
The cortex is sort of like that in relationship
to the lower parts of the brain.
Those parts of the brain, man, they’re alive.
They’re like the Titans of mythology.
They’re sitting down there, these fundamental
forces and they’re ready to leap into action
at a moment’s notice.
But the cortex basically keeps them inhibited,
and it seems to do that – so imagine that
you have a vision of your desired future.
Then a vision of the transformation stages
that you’re going to undertake to move from
where you are to that desired future.
Then what you’re doing is you’re comparing
your interpretation of the present to your
interpretation of the desired future.
As long as those two things match, which the
hippocampus is the thing that’s determining
that, it’s the thing that’s computing
the match between your fantasy of what you
want to happen with your fantasy about what
is happening.
As long as that matches then the hippocampus
basically, now we don’t know exactly how
this works, although it seems to work to some
degree through modulation of the reticular
activating system – if the hippocampus matches
what you want with what’s happening, then
all these other little sub-systems basically
turn off.
If the hippocampus detects a mismatch, which
is when novelty occurs – something went
wrong, then you get disinhibition of the reticular
activating system.
It’s like you wake up, and then everything
is primed for action.
That solves the problem of what you should
do when you don’t know what to do.
The answer is, you should get ready to do
everything.
You should be on alert and ready to implement
whatever actions – it’s not even whatever
actions, it’s more like you should be ready
to implement whatever sub-personalities the
situation seems to call for, as soon as you’re
able to identify what they are.
Otherwise it’s sort of like an army that’s
on alert.
You don’t know who’s going to be called
on, but everybody should be ready.
That’s a high stress situation.
Okay, so part of the hypothalamus, let’s
say for the sake of argument, it’s popping
up all of these little sub-personalities that
have to do with basic instincts.
The words are all wrong because they’re
not – an instinct sounds like a drive and
people aren’t driven.
We’re not that simple, we’re much more
flexible than that.
Even rats aren’t driven.
There’s a very seminal experiment that was
done at the height of behaviorism.
So the idea with behaviorists, perfectly smart
idea, was that the way a rat learned was,
it would start with a reflex, sort of in the
Piagetian sense, and then you could teach
it a new routine which was an aggregation
of little, tiny reflexes, you could teach
it a new routine by rewarding it.
So let’s say, here’s what you do with
a rat: so you want to teach the rat to climb
the ladder and go across it.
So the rat’s sniffing around in the little
rat cage.
Then it gets close to the ladder, so you give
it a food pellet.
Then it hangs around close to the ladder.
It’s because you’ve reinforced the manifestation
of those micro-behaviors that are associated
with the ladder.
Then maybe at some point the rat puts a little
paw up on the first rung, so you give it a
food pellet.
Then the rat is going like this very frequently.
Then the next thing that happens is it puts
two paws up there, and you know if you’re
patient, using reward you can get that damn
rat to do damn near anything.
Skinner taught pigeons to navigate guided
missiles by maps in the Second World War,
by pecking.
They never did use them, but really that’s
pretty impressive.
You think pigeons are stupid, they’re not
stupid they can read maps, which is pretty
damn amazing.
So the idea was is what the animal is doing
is chaining together deterministic reflexes.
The thing about a deterministic reflex is
that it’s not flexible right?
If it’s a deterministic reflex, it really
is a drive.
Action A initiates Action B, which initiates
Action C and it’s a fixed action pattern.
Some animals do seem to learn that way.
There are these little animals.
I think they’re moles that do this, it’s
shrews.
Let’s say you teach a shrew to go from point
A to B by a very inefficient maze-like route.
But the shrew could just walk straight there,
but once he learns to do this, but he can’t
figure out that he’s going from here to
here.
Whereas if you train a rat to do this the
rat will figure out, to hell with all of this
circuitousness, it’s just going to go straight
from point a to point b.
that finding was part of what indicated to
early neuro-psychological researchers that
animals produced a map of the environment.
In some sense what we’re talking about when
we’re talking about these structures, the
A to B structure, is a map.
That’s another way you can look at it.
So you’ve got this rat and it’s behaviors
are all chained together.
So I already told you, I spoiled the story
in some sense, because I told you that the
rat could learn to take a short cut.
One of the earlier demonstrations of the independence
of rat learning from the reflex of conditioning
was that - so let’s say you’ve trained
a rat to run down a maze.
Okay so hypothetically it’s using it’s
front legs and it’s back legs and it’s
learned to chain all of that together.
“Front leg, back leg, movement, turn left.
Front let, back leg, movement, turn right.
Etc.”
so then, what if you put the rat, you tie
up it’s back legs and you put him in a little
rat wheel barrel, so it’s got wheels instead
of legs – it’s like the rat zooms through
the maze.
So much for the reflex theory because obviously
you didn’t train the rat to use a cart with
it’s rear-end stuck in it, it figured that
out all by itself.
So anyways there is a system in you that allows
you to chain reflexes together.
It’s a very primordial reflex system and
the behaviorists got that right.
It’s fast, very very fast, because it requires
few neural connections.
So there are some advantages to simple learning
but once you get up to even the moderately
higher cortical and sub-cortical functions,
you’re past the point of mere reflex chaining.
Okay so, let’s for the sake of simplicity
the hypothalamus says, you need water.
So you’re current state is that you’re
thirsty and you’re desired state is you
get to go to the tap.
You can feel your mouth dry and so forth,
and some fantasies of drinking water start
to come to your mind, and then all of sudden
you’re kind of possessed by that.
So it’s starting to interfere with your
conscious goal-directed behavior at that point,
and finally it’s insistent enough like something
knocking at the door so you think, man I’m
thirsty.
Maybe you enough think that you’ll work
better if you have something to drink.
So you go off to the fountain, and what your
hippocampus is doing – you’ve got this
little idea, which is your desired future
which is about how this trip is supposed to
go, and then you’re watching to see how
the trip is actually going, but that’s an
interpretation too.
If there’s a match between the two then
the hippocampus just leaves you the hell alone
and you don’t get anxious, you don’t get
knocked off the track.
You go there, you have the water, that satiates
that system, that’s a form of reward it’s
called consumeratory reward, and then that
systems disappears.
It goes back to the dungeons from which it
emerged and in all likelihood another one
pops up.
Now, it’s an oversimplification of human
behavior to assume that you just go from one
hypothalamically mediated state to another,
although I would say that’s what two-year
olds do.
In some sense, that’s what animals do.
The two-year old’s doing it because that
little creature hasn’t gotten any more organized
than hypothalamic.
You can see this if you watch two year olds.
It’s like they’re laughing and then they’re
crying.
Then they’re hungry and then they’re hot
and then they need to go to the bathroom and
then they want to play.
It’s just one, pure, motivated or emotional
state after another.
It’s quite fun to watch.
They’re also relatively hyper-exploratory
and playful.
They’re cycling through those things all
of the time.
So you can’t say that that’s really what
an adult human does.
The reason for that is that the problem with
the pure – the reason you need a cortex
and other sub-cortical structures that aren’t
hypothalamic is because the world is too complex
for those primordial systems to solve the
problems they’re supposed to solve A, in
every possible situation, and B, across multiple
time frames, and C, in an environment that
consists of the interactions between other
very complex beings.
So it’s almost like an arm’s race of complexity
in some sense that’s driven our evolution
– the smarter you get in some sense the
more variable you get.
That’s a problem because as I got smarter,
say over the course of evolution, well you
people got smarter too.
We’re all competing and cooperating with
each other, so the whole damn system is getting
more and more complex.
You have to grow a brain in order to manage
that at least, or you keep it simple – well,
we didn’t keep it simple.
So we decided to grow a brain instead.
I don’t know if you know this but you’ve
looked at a chimpanzee – they don’t look
a lot like human beings.
There are obviously some things in common,
their hands are quite human and their ears
are quite human, but their forehead comes
down to about here, and they’re kind of
shaped like this.
They’ve got a huge, round body, and whereas
a human being is sort of like a stick with
two sticks coming out of it, and two more
sticks – we’re really, really thin, hardly
any gut.
Whereas a chimpanzee, it’s intestinal structures
are way, way, way longer than ours.
So it has to pack that into this huge gut.
A damn chimpanzee sits around for eight hours
a day chewing.
The reason for that is it eats leaves.
You go out into the forest and see how many
damn leaves you have to eat before you feel
full.
All the chimp does is sit there and chew leaves.
Then it has this huge gut so it can extract
some nourishment out of it.
We figured out how to solve that problem once
we discovered fire and hunting, because we
could cook things.
That enabled us, at least in principle, to
trade gut for brain, which I think was a pretty
useful trade, all things considered, although
it still might get us into trouble.
The brain’s a very energy-hungry organ.
We eat very, very efficient food and it turns
out that cooked food is much more nutritious
from a caloric perspective than raw food.
You can afford to sit around and develop a
brain if you’ve got high-quality food.
Otherwise you’re out there in the jungle
chewing on leaves like an idiot, it’s just
about as bad as pandas.
Do you know why those things are damn near
extinct?
They used to be carnivores but all they eat
is bamboo shoots now.
That’s it, nothing else, bamboo shoots.
They have no nutrition so they have to eat
bamboo shoots all day.
Now and then the bamboo crop fails and there
aren’t any shoots.
It’s like, so much for the pandas.
If an animal ever deserved to go extinct it
was definitely the panda.
Hunt something, the lazy bastards!
Anyways, now I discovered this about the hypothalamus
when I was ready Larry Swanson, it just bloody-well
blew me away, you’ll see why, at least in
part.
Half of the hypothalamus, roughly speaking,
is sort of devoted to popping up these basic,
primal sub-personalities; the sorts of things
that you share with animals.
Then you might say, what happens when one
of those doesn’t work?
The answer is, well you get an anxiety response.
Now, the anxiety response is not mediated
by the hypothalamus, and neither is pain.
So, if you’re an idiot your body hurts you
or tells you or scares you.
What’s interesting about that is the pain
systems and the anxiety systems are not in
the hypothalamus, they’re separate systems.
The pain system is old, old, old.
It may be as old as the hypothalamus, it’s
way down there in your brain.
But, the anxiety system is a lot newer and
that kind of makes sense.
You can imagine the primordial organisms really
didn’t stop until they ran into something
that was hurting them.”
They couldn’t think, “oh no, I might run
into something that will hurt me.
You can’t think that roughly until you have
an amygdala.
The amygdala is responsible for lots of things,
and all of these areas are interconnected.
One of the things it seems to be responsible
for, at least impart, is anxiety.
When your hippocampus detects a mismatch between
what you want to have happen and what is happening,
it disinhibits the reticular activating system,
and one of the things it activates is the
anxiety system.
The anxiety system says, “stop, you idiot,
you don’t know where you are or what you’re
doing and so you should quit before you get
into trouble.”
We don’t like that feeling very much, that
freezes us, but it’s better than pain.
You feel anxiety so you don’t have to feel
pain.
Pain seems to occur when you encounter a stimulus,
let’s say a situation, where the stimulus
magnitude is sufficient to damage those parts
of you that are encountering it – so too
bright a light, too hot a flame, too cold
a piece of metal, too hot food, whatever.
If it’s of sufficient magnitude to damage
you, you get a pain response out of that.
The pain response is supposed to teach the
part of you that moves forward, not to do
that again.
The anxiety system responds to cues of pain.
The pain system is pretty complicated as well.
Frustration is a pain-like stimulus.
Disappointment is a pain-like stimulus.
Grief and loneliness are pain-like stimuli.
Depression is probably a pain condition.
So even though the pain system is quite primordial,
it’s grown up like a complex tree, and it
consumes many different functions.
It’s still a very ancient system, whereas
the amygdalian system, which is newer, you’ve
developed over time to tell you what might
hurt you so that you can avoid contacting
it.
You’ve got your hypothalamus and it’s
telling you – it’s laying out these little
sub-personalities that are helping you deal
with the fundamental necessities of the word.
The pain system is there to tell you when
you have encountered a situation that’s
harmful, the anxiety system is there to tell
you when you might going to encounter something
harmful.
That’s the thing that’s activated when
there’s a mismatch.
The mismatch says you don’t know where you
are or where you’re going, and so you might
get hurt.
The other thing that happens, roughly speaking,
is that when the hippocampus disinhibits the
reticular activating system that turns the
other half of the hypothalamus on.
This is quite cool because the other half
of the hypothalamus is the place where the
ventral tegmental area is located.
The ventral tegmental area is the part of
the brain where the dopaminergic tracks emerge,
and those are the tracks that you use A, to
explore, and B, to respond to cues of consumatory
reward.
So what that means in non-technical language
is that when you encounter mismatch you get
anxious, which is what you should do, you
should stop, something’s wrong.
As long as nothing else happens that’s painful
or threatening, than that system starts to
acclimatize, partly because you’re looking
around and thinking.
People often talk about this as habituation.
That’s a stupid idea.
It’s habituation if you’re a sea slug.
It’s not a habituation if you’re a person,
except that in very, very primordial reflex-like
levels of the nervous system.
At the higher order levels that we’re talking
about, it’s learning.
If you stop and you’re anxious, what happens?
Well, generally speaking, you start thinking,
what the hell might be going on?
You’re running through all of these different
theories and part of the way that works is
that it’s partly a consequence of state-dependent
learning.
If you’re anxious you’re going to be primed
to remember situations that you were anxious
in before.
Why should you do that?
The reason for that is that “things that
make you anxious” is a category.
It’s actually a category.
We tend to think of categories as something
that exists in the objective world.
That is not how your brain categorizes things.
You have to learn that really painfully to
make objective categorizations.
As far as your natural nervous system is concerned
all things that go “bump” in the night
are the same thing.
What is that?
It’s some bloody, horrible predatory, crocodilian,
dragon-like, monster that hides under your
bed and comes out and bites you when you’re
three.
I just read a little paper today about this
kind of cat that lived back when were still
figuring out how to use spears.
This was a particularly nasty kind of cat,
and it preyed on us, roughly speaking.
We didn’t get eaten by too many cats because
cats really can’t bite through the skull.
They could go for your neck but they didn’t
necessarily kill you.
This cat had a mouth that fit right around
your skull and it had two teeth that went
in here and two teeth that went in here.
It was a silent killer.
There is evidence that even children are capable
of recognizing the motion in pattern of a
predatory cat, and one of the hypotheses is
that we still have all of our primate ancestors
that didn’t get eaten by that particular
cat.
We’re pretty damn good at detecting cats,
at least of that type, and we seem to have
conserved that ability at least to some degree.
You think about a category, you might think
well there’s fish and there’s birds and
there’s mammals and there’s reptiles,
those are Linnaean classifications, they’re
based in some sense on Evolutionary divergence.
Where they’re not, on morphology.
Who cares about that?
Things that eat you, that’s a category.
You need that category.
The other category is also things that might
eat you.
So things that eat you, those are things that
can hurt you and the things that might eat
you are things you haven’t classified yet,
but might be dangerous.
That’s your brain’s natural category;
one of them.
Then you might think well if that’s the
natural category, see that’s the sort of
thing that the guy that wrote An Ecological
Approach on Vision Perception, he talked about
as an affordance.
An affordance is something who’s meaning
you instantly perceive.
So you might say, “No, no, no, you see a
cat.”
Then you infer that it might eat you.
No, you see something that might eat you,
and then you might be able to figure out that
it’s a cat.
It’s the “might eat you” that you see
first, no the damn cat.
This is a fascinating phenomenon because it
suggests, like the Heidigerians proposed,
that what you perceive first in the world
is meanings and out of the meanings you extract
objects.
It’s not the other way around.
If you look at the way your brain is organized,
that’s how it works folks.
The more primordial your brain system is,
which means the more ancient it is, the more
its perception is action predicated.
So for example, if you hear a loud noise behind
you and you startle, that’s your response.
So you’re going into a crouch where it would
be difficult for a tiger to bite your neck.
You do that, man that’s way before your
thinking.
It’s before your perceiving, consciously.
You’re not getting images or sounds at that
point.
It’s so quick.
That’s a category: things that make you
go like this.
That’s a good category.
The reason I’m making such a case about
that category is because that’s one of the
mythological categories: Things that go bump
in the night.
One of the things that primordial people were
trying to figure out is – you could think
of any old animal as figuring out how to escape
from a predator.
That isn’t what human beings wanted to figure
out.
Not once we were able to abstract.
What we wanted to do instead was to figure
out how to escape from the class of all things
that could eat you; not just any particular
old thing, but all of them at once.
That’s the advantage to categorization.
Can we arrange things so that nothing could
eat us?
How do you go about doing that?
Believe me, we’ve been working on that problem
for a very, very long time.
One of the answers we came up with, we’ll
get into this later, is the idea of sacrifice.
Sacrifice is a very, very ancient idea.
I’ll just give you a bit of a preview.
It took me like twenty years to figure this
out.
Human beings discovered sacrifice a long time
ago.
They acted it out before they understood it.
We act out lots of things before we understand
them.
The idea is sort of well we can make a bargain
with God.
You might say, well what’s God?
We’ll approach that problem later, it’s
a very complicated problem.
One thing you could think of God as, is, God
is the anthropomorphic representation of the
entire social structure across time.
You might say, well God will reward you if
you behave properly.
What does that mean?
Imagine you could conceive of everyone that
wasn’t you as one metaperson.
Imagine that that metaperson is God.
You can make a deal with that thing.
You can say if I behave properly that metabeing
will respond positively to me in the future.
It’s true, right?
You know that.
If you make a promise to someone and you keep
it, something good is likely going to happen
to you in the future.
So that’s a God the Father derivation – it’s
far more complicated than that, but that’s
not a bad point.
We kind of figured out that we could bargain
with it across time and that would work.
I read a really interesting paper by someone
who’s actually a former student of mine,
Azim Shariff, and he analyzed the relationship
between criminal behavior and belief in Hell
across a whole set of countries.
I don’t know if it was an exhaustive analysis,
correlational analysis.
It’s way more peaceful in countries where
people believe in hell.
You think should you believe in hell?
Yes and no.
Atheist arguments aside, we’re not even
going to bother with them because they’re
kind of moronic.
The idea here is that there are certain action
patterns that if you undertake, you will be
viciously punished in the future.
You try lying to everyone you meet and see
how well you’ll do in a twenty-year period.
You’re going to be in such trouble by the
end of that twenty-year period that hell will
be the only accurate way to describe where
you’re situated.
So it’s no joke these are real things and
people came up with these ideas for a reason.
Hell isn’t only where other people put you
if you’re bad, it’s a lot more profound
a concept than that.
That’s not a bad start.
Anyways, the sacrificial notion was something
like we cannot do what we want to do right
now and do something else, and that will make
things better in the future.
Think about that people.
That’s the most brilliant idea human beings
ever came up with.
There’s this old story, which is probably
not true, about how to catch a monkey.
You get this jar that’s got a pretty thin
neck.
Just big enough for a monkey to put its hand
in, and you fill it with things monkeys like
to eat.
Let’s say hard candy for the sake of argument.
So you put that out there and the monkey goes
and sticks its hand in and grabs a bunch of
candy.
It can’t get its damn hand out because it’s
only big enough for it to put its hand in.
so then you can just go and pick up the monkey.
Well, what’s the problem with the monkey?
It can’t sacrifice.
It won’t sacrifice its grip on the damn
candy for its future existence.
That’s what your parents have been teaching
you ever since you were little kids.
Let go of the candy so that you can live.
That’s delay of gratification, right?
That’s contentiousness, that’s the discovery
of time and its relationship to the social
environment.
It’s so brilliant.
Part of what people were trying to figure
out when they were developing these rituals
of sacrifice is – okay, so you think about
society as a meta-person, it’s usually represented
as male by the way, but not always, it depends
on the circumstances.
So what does this meta-person want?
You have to try to figure that out.
Part of what it wants is – don’t eat all
the damn grain today, save some for next year,
right?
Act as if the future exists as part of the
social contact.
God, that’s such a discovery man.
It’s only people who figured that out.
I mean squirrels have kind of got it in some
sense because they store nuts, and squirrels
are smart.
They just kind of got the inkling of it.
I think what squirrels do is they eat all
of the nuts they can possibly eat right now,
and then they store the rest of them.
It wouldn’t go hungry if you store nuts
for the future, human beings will do that
– don’t eat the seed grain, right?
Then you’re going to die next year.
Alright, so back to the hypothalamus.
Now, you’re doing something you want to
do and you’re tracking how that’s going
– both of those are hypotheses, by the way.
All of a sudden something happens that you
don’t want to have happen, like you live
in Flint, Michigan for example.
So you decide to go have some water and it
turns out that it’s not water at all, it’s
led.
I don’t know if you guys know about that,
but it’s just the sort of thing that makes
your jaw drop.
The state is in big trouble – Michigan.
So they appointed an auditor to control finances,
I believe at the state level.
It might have been only at the city level,
but it doesn’t matter.
Let’s say the state level.
So the auditor was looking for ways to save
money and one of the ways they decided to
save money was to hook up Flint, Michigan’s
water supply to a river instead of to the
great lake, which is what it’s right beside.
Turns out, since Flint was an industrial center
forever, that the water’s just full of led.
So now they have something like fifty thousand
led-poisoned people living in Flint, Michigan.
That is not a good thing.
Led lowers your IQ rapidly and it makes you
violent.
For the ten thousand dollars they saved they
probably cost themselves half a million dollars
per person.
It wasn’t actually that there was led in
the water it was that the water was more acidic.
Oh, it took the led out of the pipes, yeah,
good point.
Well I’m not here to complain about Michigan
politicians, the point is, is that just because
you think you’re out for a drink of water
that does not necessarily mean that’s what’s
going on.
That’s why I said that you’re comparing
your vision of the future to what you think
is going on right now.
Now if you read the neuropsychologists like
Vinagradova, Sokolov and Jeffrey Gray, they’re
basically behaviorists.
So what they tell you is this – and this
is different – what they tell you is you
have this little expectancy map that’s like
the rat has of its surroundings – it’s
a spatio-temporal map.
So when you’re doing something, you expect
a certain outcome, okay.
What you compare that to is reality as it
unfolds.
So you could say, so you’ve got this map
and then stimuli appear to you, and those
are objectively real.
No, that’s wrong.
It’s wrong.
It’s interpretation everywhere.
You think you know what’s going on right
now and you think you know what you want.
The reason I’m making such a big deal out
of this is because look, if you’re a rat
and you’re going about your business and
something you don’t want happens, according
to the Gray Behaviorist model, you have to
revamp your expectancy map.
According to the model that I’m proposing
it’s way worse than that, because you don’t
know where the damn error is.
It might be in the map of what you want, not
what you expect, that’s a different thing,
but it also might be in the map you have that’s
of the present.
So it’s not just the map that you have that’s
a prediction of your actions that’s at fault,
it could easily be the way you’re construing
the world right now.
It could be error at any level of behavior
and so what it means is when an anomaly occurs,
it spreads doubt through the entire hierarchy
that we were describing including the future,
the present and even the past.
You know this, you know this perfectly well.
You can see it when you encounter complex
anomaly.
So a complex anomaly would be you have a long-term
relationship and you get betrayed.
So betrayed means you’ve trusted someone
and they enticed you to do so, and then they
exploit that trust and hurt you.
For Dante, the betrayers were in the lowest
circle of hell.
So it’s a particularly nasty thing to do
to people.
If you think about trust as the precondition
for interpersonal relationships, which it
is, then if someone acts towards you in a
way that violates your trust in trust, then
they’ve done you the worst disservice that
someone could possibly be done.
Okay, so you get betrayed.
Alright so, bang!
That’s an anomaly.
What does it imply?
That’s the wrong question.
The right question is, what doesn’t it imply?
It implies that you just don’t have the
foggiest notion of what you’re doing or
what human beings are like.
Especially if it’s a particularly vicious
betrayal, maybe you’ve been suckered by
a psychopath, it’s like, okay, update your
model and account for that – good luck,
especially if you’re naive.
The probability that you’ll be able to reach
down into the depths far enough to come up
with a coherent explanation for why someone
would do that is very, very low.
What I’ve discovered in my clinical practice
is that if you get betrayed badly enough,
the only language that you can use to describe
it is fundamentally religious.
At some points of betrayal it’s good versus
evil.
It’s malevolence.
It’s the malevolence that really traumatizes
people.
It’s the fact that that person was out to
hurt you.
What’s a human being like when they’re
capable of that?
It’s an age-old question.
I’ll tell you something weird and interesting.
There’s this old idea in Genesis, one of
the first ideas in Genesis, is that God made
people a paradise to live in.
Let’s just be wild about this for a moment,
and assume that your little model when it’s
going well is a little paradise, right?
The world’s turning out the way you want
it to.
There’s a snake in there somewhere, and
that means – well, why is there a snake?
There’s a bunch of things you’re not paying
attention to while you’re going about your
business, right?
In fact, there are almost an infinite number
of things that you’re not paying attention
to.
The problem is that one of those infinite
number of things that you’re not paying
attention to can shift on you all of a sudden.
So there’s always this snake in the garden.
Then you have to figure out what to do with
it.
The thing is, if you interact with the snake
you get more conscious.
The problem with that is you lose your little
paradise.
Okay, well it’s worse than that, because
that story is really old.
We have no idea how old it is.
It’s disseminated all over the world, or
it emerged independently in different places,
we don’t really know.
In any case it doesn’t really matter.
It’s a fundamental enough story – tree
plus snake plus people – that no matter
where you go some people have tree snake stories.
I think that’s because we lived in trees
for like thirty million years and we got eaten
by an awful lot of snakes.
So it’s a story that really appeals to us.
Every bloody science fiction movie you go
to most of the time if the aliens are bad,
they’re always reptilian.
You don’t get furry little koala aliens
that are chasing you around, it’s like the
one’s an alien.
A reptile inside a reptile, they’re nasty
beasts, and they come out inside of you even.
Which is another symbolic idea.
Okay, so you’ve always got the damn snake,
and it’s popping out all of the time, and
there’s nothing you can do about it except
getting ready to deal with snakes, no getting
rid of them.
So that’ the first lesson, you’re not
getting rid of the damn snakes.
You better learn to deal with them.
Then the next question is, what is the worst
possible snake?
One of the things that happened in Christianity,
and this was influenced in part by Zoroastrianism,
was the idea of almost an independent evil
arose.
In fact there was a branch of Christianity
called Manichaeism, that construed the world
as a battle between good and evil where good
and evil had equal reality.
They were in this eternal battle.
Now that got wiped out by the standard Christian
theory that evil was actually just the absence
of good, which anyways you could have a big
debate about that and people have for thousands
of years.
As Christianity developed, there’s this
weird mythology that grew up around the weird
myth of Genesis.
The weird mythology was that the snake in
the Garden of Eden was also Satan, and that
he’s the king of all evil.
Okay, what does that mean?
It’s pretty straight- forward.
What’s the worst predator?
Well that’s easy, the worst predator is
a human being.
The worst of all possible snakes is the most
malevolent possible being.
That’s exactly right, and that’s why that
association was made.
It’s so interesting because it took people
thousands of years to make that association.
It wasn’t really put together well until
Milton formalized in Paradise Lost.
We kind of observe this in action, that there
were bad people.
Okay, so bad is a category.
What does bad entail?
Mythologies of evil center in on what constitutes
bad.
Carnivorous might be one of the things; malevolent,
out to hurt, right?
Betrayal, lying, and all of the cardinal great
sins.
That’s the worst snake.
It’s a psychologization of the idea of the
predator.
It’s even more sophisticated than that,
because one branch of that theory is that
the worst predator is the evil force outside
of you, but the next branch of that is that
the worst predator is the evil force within
you.
Yeah, well that’s when it gets really psychologized.
You think, well is that superstition?
Hey, that’s not superstition boys and girls,
it’s a lot more intelligent than that.
It’s the most sophisticated theory of the
way things work that we have and it’s correct.
Now what that means from a metaphysical perspective,
we’re not going to talk about that because
we can, but we can certainly talk about what
it means in practical Darwinian terms.
You better know what’s after you, and the
worst thing that could possibly be after you
is a fully motivated and completely malevolent
human being.
Skull-crushing cats be damned.
All they want to do is eat you, they’re
not going to torture you; whereas if you fall
into the hands of the wrong human being man,
you could be in excruciating pain for the
next twenty years.
So people are very imaginative if they figure
out how to hurt someone.
They can keep it up for a long time, and they’re
fully motivated to do so under some conditions.
So you really got to watch out for that.
Alright so back to the hypothalamus.
So when you have a mismatch between what you
desire and what you’re after, then the hippocampus
says, “uh, we don’t know where we are.”
That’s what it says.
You no longer know where you are.
Okay, what should you do when you don’t
know where you are?
You should stop moving.
Then you should – well then what?
You should prepare to do a lot of things.
Okay, then what?
Then you should explore.
Well that’s where the other half of the
hypothalamus comes in; that dopamanergic circuit
that mediates positive emotion, right?
Almost all the positive emotion that you experience
in your life, the kind you like, which is
hope and curiosity and expectation and surprise
and that’s all mediated by the dopamanergic
systems.
It’s a major-league contributor to the totality
of your being, especially in a positive direction.
That’s rooted in the hypothalamus, so what
that means is that, it’s quite cool, you
got your fundamental motivations, you know
your basic biological motivations, “bang!”
they fail, that’s anxiety, that’s a newer
system, and exploration.
That’s an older system.
That damn exploratory system has been there
forever.
Now if you look at classic hero mythology,
which we’re going to do in great detail,
what you see is that the typical myth of humanity
is we live in a place, we’ll say.
We have to live in a place, and the place
is doing quite nicely, thank you very much.
The Hobbits and Frodo.
So you’ve got the little shire there, right?
It’s all peaceful, it’s full of these
little people who are a little on the arrogant
side, they’re kind of dopey, they have no
idea what the hell’s going on in the outside
world, but they think that’s okay, they
think you know, peculiar people are concerned
about that sort of thing.
They’ve got their little happy paradise
going, they live a long time, they eat a lot,
they party a lot.
Unbeknownst to them, which is a very interesting
feature of the story, the only reason they
have any peace at all is because they’re
descendants of old kings, continually patrolling
the borders, right?
Those are the striders.
Aragorn, he’s the member of the race of
old kings who patrols the borders.
Those are ancestral figures, it’s like you
can all sit here in your little happy paradise,
but the only reason you can do it is because
the sons of great kings have put borders around
your kingdom.
It’s funny because in the Hobbit, the Hobbit’s
basically despise the Strider, they’re very,
very suspicious of him.
He’s kind of dirty and dusty and he looks
like he’s been banged around all over the
world.
He’s sort of like a tramp.
They don’t know he’s the son of a great
king, good thing for them that he is, however.
Okay, so then you’ve got the little shire,
what happens?
Evil things are stirring.
What is it?
Well, fundamentally it’s a great dragon.
Well that’s a snake, except it’s like
a meta-snake.
It’s snake with fire.
You can be sure that fire was not only one
of our greatest allies, but one of our greatest
enemies, especially when we lived on the blank
in Africa.
That thing would burn now and then.
So, get the hell away from that.
So anyways, one hobbit, who’s woken up by
a wizard – the wizard is the symbol for
the self from the Jungian perspective.
So there’s one hobbit who’s a little bit
more creative and exploratory than the rest
and everybody has a little respect for him
but they think he’s pretty damn peculiar.
He decides that he’s going to, under the
tutelage of the wizard, he’s going to go
check out this dragon.
So he leaves the borders and goes out into
the unknown.
Then the rest of it is an adventure and one
of things that’s very interesting, again
from a Jungian perspective, is that, what
does the Hobbit have to become in order to
conquer the dragon?
A thief.
Now that’s pretty weird, because you think
hey man, this guy’s out being a hero, so
he should be a hero.
No, he turns into a thief.
Why?
Well it’s because if you’re going to conquer
a dragon you better be a hell of a lot tougher
than you are naive.
So, partly what happens is, for the hobbit
to masker up the forces that are necessary
for him to confront something that is that
fundamental, he has to transcend the cowardess
that he describes as morality.
Okay, so Nietzsche for example, Nietzsche’s
often viewed as a critic of morality.
That’s not true.
Nietzsche identifies morality with cowardess,
but that’s not what he does.
What Nietzsche says is this: if you’re too
afraid to do something, so you won’t do
it, then you’ll say that the reason you
don’t do it is because you’re moral.
That’s not the reason.
The reason is that you’re too damn afraid
to do it.
You might want to, but you’re too afraid.
That doesn’t make you moral.
So what happens to the Hobbit, for example,
once he gets outside of the kingdom, he has
to develop a whole array of potentials that
he never developed before, because they were
either not necessary in his civilized place,
or because they were forbidden as immoral
by the cultural situation that he grew up
in.
You have to be touched by the snake in order
to defeat the snake.
Where else have you seen that motif?
Harry Potter, right?
Harry Potter’s a strange character because
he’s not obedient, not at all.
In fact, he’s quite disobedient.
He breaks the rules in the service of higher
morality.
The higher morality is that he faces down
the dragon that paralyzes you, and he frees
the virgin.
That’s what happens with Ginny – Virginia,
Virgin, it’s the retelling of Saint George
and the dragon.
And interesting enough, the reason that Harry
Potter revivifies, is because Dumbledore’s
phoenix comes by and cries in his wounds.
Well the phoenix is something that dies and
is reborn and so the meta-myth underlying
the second-volume of the harry potter series
is that the part of you sustains you through
an encounter with a dragon that paralyzes,
is the part of you that can die and be reborn.
What that means in a sense is if you’re
wrong about something, and you fall into a
pit, then you should let go of what you’re
wrong about, so that something new can arise.
So it’s better to be the thing that transforms
in response to catastrophe, than it is the
thing that’s static.
That’s another big discovery of people.
We’re agents of transformation, which is
of course why kids are so bloody obsessed
with magicians and wizards, which are agents
of transformation.
That’s all embedded in the mythology, it’s
all acted out.
Nobody understands this sort of thing to speak
of.
Certainly the kids don’t, it just hits them.
They can recognize the pattern.
They know that there’s something magical
about them, even though they’re living in
a cupboard in a London suburb, where everything
is boring and flat and under control.
That’s not the real world, and it’s true,
it’s not.
Is that why we have more patience for people,
including criminals, who admit their crime
and do their punishment and redeem themselves?
Oh not only patience, we often have admiration
for them.
Oh yeah, how many movies feature attractive
bad guy?
Well or for that matter, attractive bad woman?
It’s because of the Nietzchian observation.
The people who are good aren’t good, they’re
just cowards.
Whereas the guy who’s bad, well at least
he’s not a coward.
Well then you might say, well you know, yeah
he could stop being a coward and also become
a good guy, but that’s often but not always
the actual plot of the movie.
That’s the redemption of the bad guy.
It’s also what woman fantasize about in
relationship to the beauty and the beast mythology.
They don’t want a coward.
He’s the guy that wants to be the friend.
It’s complete bullshit.
The bad guys going to advance over that – but
not a big enough advance because he’s a
bad guy.
The best thing you want is a civilized bad
guy.
That’s what you want.
Well no wonder, because it’s only a civilized
bad guy that’s going to be capable to be
dealing with the dragons.
It’s right.
Lloyd Axworthy, when he was the minister of
Foreign Affairs for Canada, we know the massacres
were going on in Yugoslavia.
It was front-page news at one point.
He said, “I don’t have the imagination
for that kind of evil.”
Oh well, that’s really impressive mister
minister of foreign affairs, did you ever
read about the Holocaust?
It’s like, it’s time to wake up a little
bit!
These things happen, but he said it as a moral
claim.
I just couldn’t imagine that sort of thing
happening.
Well, you’re a little on the naïve said,
aren’t you?
And parading that around as morality is not
a reasonable thing to do when you also happen
to be Minister of Foreign affairs.
You should be looking out for the snakes all
of the time.
They’re definitely out there, and Milosevic
was definitely one of them.
So if a naive person meets someone like that,
the naive person loses.
That’s not good because there’s lots of
people like that and it would be better if
they didn’t win.
So anyways, the fact that the exploratory
circuitry is embedded into the hypothalamus
way down there with lust and thirst and hunger,
it’s so great because it shows you how the
mythology works.
It basically says, okay, here’s a bunch
of things you’re doing now and then they’ll
go wrong.
You need a system to deal with things when
they go wrong.
What’s the system?
Well it might kill you, bang!
You better have some pain and anxiety to protect
you.
You better figure out what it is.
Okay, better have an exploratory system so
that you can go out there and gather some
more information.
Well that’s the human story: gather information
in the face of danger.
That’s the human story.
That’s what we do.
So that’s the hero myth.
The hero myth is redemptive, and that’s
because it is redemptive.
That is what works, or at least what we’ve
stated our being on.
Who knows?
Maybe all of this exploration will just get
us in trouble.
That’s another part of genesis, right?
Poke around and see what happens.
Well you know you’re doing that all of the
time.
You‘re in your little paradise, beedling
away all happily, and then you just can’t
stop yourself from pulling on a thread somewhere.
Then you find out, oh my God, then maybe that’s
when you get suspicious about your partner
cheating on you.
You think, maybe this person’s cheating
on me, and you can’t leave it alone.
You can’t leave it alone, you got to go
look at the snake.
Turns out it’s there!
Down you go into the underworld.
You might think, maybe the bliss of ignorance
would have been better.
Well, it’s not like psychologist don’t
tell you that.
All those positive illusion people, that’s
there whole shtick.
It’s better to be a little bit dumb about
how things work, because otherwise there’s
no way you can be happy.
That’s an idiotic theory on two accounts.
A, happy isn’t the point, and B, dumb is
not the goal.
So it’s so ignorant that it’s actually
corrupt.
Which is really saying something, because
you have to be pretty damn ignorant before
you get to corrupt.
So it’s a hell of a thing to teach people.
You have to delude yourself in a minor way
otherwise you can’t stand being alive.
Oh my God, that’s awful, that’s really
awful.
Here’s a different story, maybe you’re
tough enough to open your eyes.
That’d be a much better story.
It’s possible too because people are really,
really, really tough.
It’s just that they live in these little
protected places and they never get out there
and hammer themselves out against the world,
so they never discover that they’re tough.
You might thing, well that’s your opinion.
Well no, it’s not my damn opinion.
We know that if you take someone who’s naïve
and paralyzed by anxiety, and you put them
in psychotherapy and you expose them to the
things that they’re afraid of and disgusted
by and avoiding, that it isn’t that they
get less afraid, they get more confident.
That’s what generalizes.
If you bring someone in who’s got a mouse
phobia and you treat the mouse phobia, then
they’re not as afraid of a bunch of other
things.
Why does that happen?
They weren’t afraid of the damn mouse, they’re
afraid of their own inadequacy.
Then you teach them that they don’t have
to be afraid, and then they think , “hey,
I don’t have to be afraid.”
Then they’re not afraid of a whole bunch
of things.
So you get generalization from behavioral
exposure.
There’s no question about whether or not
exposure to the things that you avoid is curative,
it’s the fundamental axiom of psychotherapy.
That and figuring out what you’re going
to do with your future.
Even in psychoanalysis it’s face what threatens
you.
It’s just that the psychoanalysts go after
past traumas.
It doesn’t matter as far as your brain is
concerned.
A dangerous thing in the past is exactly the
same thing as a dangerous thing in the present.
It seems to be partly because the amygdala
doesn’t have any sense of time.
it’s interesting because one of the things
Jung observed was that there’s no time in
the collective unconscious.
It’s like everything is an eternal now.
So let’s say you got traumatized when you
were a kid, your amygdala grows; maybe you
got bitten by a spider.
You’re afraid of that spider then and now
and in the future.
It’s the same.
It’s outside of time.
The hippocampus is the thing that’s dealing
with time.
So, you know, if you really learn a lesson
it’s supposed to be timeless.
You can still help people overcome their phobias,
but you can’t get their damn amygdala to
shrink again.
So, you can just get it back under control.
Okay, so that’s pretty cool.
Then, we could say, let’s go up a level
or two.
Well, let’s look at the amygdala for a minute.
Things about the amygdala have probably changed
since I updated my knowledge, but it doesn’t
really matter because the fundamental systems
I’m telling you about exist.
They keep moving around in the brain because
we don’t know exactly how they work, but
at a system level of description and using
slightly vague neuropsychology, we can localize
these sorts of things in the brain.
Okay so the amygdala gets inputs from everywhere.
Basically what it’s looking for are things
that might threaten you.
You could say in a sense that the amygdala
has an inbuilt sense of the monstress.
Let me show you, this is a good time to show
you a comic.
This is a great comic.
Someone stoned came up with this comic.
They really did.
I really like this comic because it shows
you what’s going on perfectly.
Okay, so there are these hippies.
They’re all friends of this guy named Fat
Freddie.
They’re basically useless hippies.
They don’t pay rent and all they do is smoke
pot.
Anyways, at one point they make a bunch of
money on some cocaine deal and they buy this
home out in the country.
They think they’re going to go out there
and live in paradise, so they bring their
cat along, which is Fat Freddie’s cat who
has his own adventures with cockroaches and
so on.
Anyways, if you’ve ever had a cat one thing
you know about cats is they don’t like to
move.
It makes them very upset and nervous, and
if you put them in a new house they’re not
happy about it.
The reason for that is you’ve blown their
map, right?
The cat will slink around in a new territory
and map every single place and every hiding
place, obsessively, until it knows what the
hell’s going on, and then it will finally
relax.
A cat in a new place is not a calm cat.
A cat in a new place is a nervous cat, which
is also an indication that you don’t have
to learn to be afraid.
What you have to learn is how to be calm.
That reverse the way that psychologists generally
talk about anxiety, because they’re all
hobbits and they think that life is safe.
So because they think that life is safe, you
have to learn to be afraid.
That’s dopey.
The natural condition is terror and curiosity.
If you’re really lucky now and then, you’re
somewhere safe enough so that you don’t
have to be afraid.
That’s tenuous and delicate.
So what you have to learn is how not to be
afraid.
Not, how to be afraid.
Anyways, they got the cat.
So he’s in his box and they take him out
of the box and the cat thinks, “so this
is the country.”
So the cat goes really low and starts sniffing,
and that is what animals do when they first
start exploring.
Both of those things: they crouch down because
that makes them less visible to predators,
and they sniff.
The reason they sniff is because most animals
have their whole brains built around their
sense of smell; unlike us, where most of our
brain is built around vision.
Anyways, the cat’s slinking around there
and it smells something that it doesn’t
know.
It thinks, God only knows what this thing
that I don’t know is.
It would freeze first and then it would hastily
retreat.
So now it’s underneath the porch.
One hippie says, “where’d the cat disappear
now?”
The other one says, “under the house.”
The cat’s down there shaking, which is what
cats do when they’re freaked out like that,
and it’s got it’s little fantasy going.
You’d hide to if you smelled what I did.
Then it imagines up this monster.
A monster technically is the amalgamation
of unrelated parts.
So what’s the monster?
Well its got duck feet and bare arms and its
got a skunk tail and its got kind of a wolf
head, and its got antlers.
You think, well that thing doesn’t exist.
That’s wrong.
That thing exists.
In fact it’s a really accurate representation
of what’s out there in the forest.
Any one animal wouldn’t look like that,
but the set of all possible animals looks
exactly like that.
Then you might think, well what do you want
first, when you’re analyzing something?
Do you want quick and dirty representation
of what to be afraid of?
Or do you want to hang around trying to figure
out whether that thing has hooves and teeth?
It’s like no, you want a quick and dirty
representation of just what might be lurking
out there.
That’s intelligent hypothesizing.
It’s the kind of hypothesizing that would
be evolutionary driven.
Did you ever see the far side cartoon, Monster
Snorkel?
I love that cartoon.
There’s this little kid in his bed, it’s
dark and he’s under cover.
He’s one of those ugly little kids that
Gary Larson always drew.
He’s got this snorkel that you use for scuba
diving.
Snorkeling, not scuba diving.
All that’s sticking out from under the covers
is his snorkel so that he can breathe.
Of course in his imagination there’s some
reptilian dinosaur sitting beside his bed.
Well, why?
That’s what he’s hypothesizing.
Why?
Because that’s what’s in the dark.
You can tell your kid, there’s no monsters
in the dark.
Then you tell your kid to never talk to a
stranger.
Well get your story straight people.
Really?
It’s so dopey.
Yes there are monsters in the dark.
What do you tell your kids?
No, there’s no such thing as monsters.
First of all they’re driven half crazy because
they think what am I afraid of then?
Second, you tell them all of the time that
there are monsters in the dark.
In fact you’re probably more paranoid about
the things than your damn kid is.
So what do you tell them?
There are monsters in the dark but you can
probably handle them, especially with our
help.
Okay, so now I’ll tell you a story.
So my nephew, he was six, and he had night
terrors.
Night terrors are this strange phenomena where
all of a sudden you wake up screaming.
It’s quite unpleasant.
You might say, well why is this happening?
The answer is that we really don’t know
but there was some instability in his household
at that point.
A, he was just going off to kindergarten,
so that’s a big transition.
It’s out of paradise and out into the world.
B, his parents were in the throws of approaching
divorce, so there was that sort of undercurrent
in the house.
You know what that’s like.
You walk into a house like that and you know
something’s up.
It’s like the air is frozen.
It’s probably something you can smell, I
think.
Whatever, it doesn’t matter, but you can
certainly tell.
So anyways, he’s waking up at night screaming
away.
He’s a very verbal kid.
During the day he’s running around, I guess
he was about four, not six.
He’s got this little night hat that he wears.
It’s a plastic night hat.
So he zooms around with that all of the time,
and he’s got this plastic sword, and he
zooms around with that too.
So you think what’s he up to?
He’s playing knight, which is kind of weird
in a way.
Because you’d think why would being a knight
be attractive to a kid?
We weren’t knights for that long.
Whatever, it doesn’t really matter.
He was running around playing knight.
He goes to sleep and he puts his knight hat
and is sword right beside his bed.
So fine, I watch that.
I’m watching what’s going on with them
and I’m figuring out what’s going on in
the house.
His mom is worried because he’s having night
terrors.
Yeah, it’s horrible he wakes up screaming.
So okay, nighttime comes.
He wakes up screaming, we’re all sitting
at the breakfast table the next day.
I said, did you dream about anything?
He said, yeah!
He got right into this dream and he said okay,
this is what happened: I was out in a field
and all of these little dwarfs were around
me.
They only came up to my knees but they had
big beaks, they didn’t have any arms, but
they had big beaks.
They were covered with hair and grease, so
they were all greased down.
There was a cross-shave at the top of their
head, and wherever I went these beaked dwarfs
would jump at me with their feet and bite
me.
They’re everywhere!
Everyone stops eating breakfast to look at
this kid, thinking, wow no wonder why you’re
screaming man.
Then he said, yeah, and it was worse than
that because there was smoke and at the back
of the dwarfs there was this dragon and the
dragon was breathing out smoke and fire and
the smoke and fire would turn into the dwarfs.
Oh my God, what do you do about that?
Wiping out some dwarfs, who cares, but the
dragon will just breathe up some more.
That’s life man.
I’ve got this excellent picture, let me
show it to you because it’s worth finding,
even though it’s going to interrupt my story
a little bit.
Well I’m not going to find it because it
will take too long, but I’ll tell you what
it is.
It’s a Greek amphora.
You know amphora, it’s like a vase, and
people used to keep wine in them.
It’s painted on like a cartoon, it’s sort
of black and white.
It’s got this hero, who I believe is Hercules.
Hercules is facing this snake, and it’s
a really cool snake.
So first of all it’s tail is curled in a
perfect circle.
If you look at dragons and snakes in mythology,
their tales are often curled in a circle.
It means something like infinity.
Then there are all these snakes – it’s
a hydra.
It’s a snake with eight heads.
Then there’s Hercules with his sword – well,
what’s the problem with the hydra?
You cut off one head and eight more heads
grow.
Quit cutting off heads – it’s a good piece
of foreign policy advice for the middle east.
The hydras keep growing.
Okay, so cutting off heads isn’t going to
be of any utility.
Here’s what the story is saying: no matter
how many problems you solve there’s going
to be a bunch more problems and it’s even
worse than that.
If you have a problem and you solve it that’s
going to lead to more problems.
So even the solution is a problem.
That’s the law of unexpected consequences.
That’s why automobiles have destroyed the
atmosphere.
Everybody thought an automobile is for getting
from point A to point B. It turns out it’s
not.
It’s for turning the world’s holes into
jungles.
We didn’t know that.
So that’s an unexpected consequence.
So anyways, the kid is faced with this horrible
conundrum.
What am I going to do?
I’ve got these stupid dwarfs and then there’s
this dragon.
So I said, what could you do about that?
Now that’s called a loaded question and
it would be inadmissible in a court of law
in a sense because it’s a question – but
it isn’t because I’m telling him something.
You could do something about that.
Well that’s a hell of a theory.
Well yeah, I should just lay down and let
the dwarfs eat me.
No, no you could do something about it, I
said.
What could you do?
Then he said, I’d put my hat on, I’d get
my sword, then I’d go get my dad and we’d
go up to the dragon.
I would jump on his head and then I’d poke
both his eyes out with my sword and then I’d
go right down to his stomach to the place
where the fire comes out and I’d cut a piece
off of that and I’d use it as a shield.
And I thought, “right on, kid!
You got it.”
It was so cool because he had the whole thing,
eh.
That’s why he was running around playing
knight.
He’d almost got it, and all I had to do
was drop – there’s this fifth chemical
phenomena called a super-saturated solution.
It’s kind of cool.
So if you take - water can only dissolve so
much sugar until the sugar starts to crystallize
out.
If you really slowly cool down then water
and you don’t tap it there’s no impurities.
You can get the solution super saturated which
means, weirdly enough, it holds more sugar
than it can.
It’s like it forgets to crystallize or maybe
it needs a little impurity or shock or something
to get it going, but it’s like it forgets
to crystallize.
So then if you take a little crystal of sugar
and you drop it in, it’s like it goes “sound”
and instantly it’s all crystals.
So that’s what happened to this kid: he
was there, he was ready, he had to answer,
and all I had to do was say you could do something
about this and “poof!”
instant hero myth.
The cool thing is no more night terrors.
So you get the picture, it’s very, very
cool.
Alright so, back to our discussion.
Now, alright so you’ve got the brain here.
This is the brain as conceptualized by Alexander
Luria, who was Russia’s most famous neuropsychologist.
So basically he said that there’s a bunch
of different ways you can divide up the brain.
It depends on what you want, which is an interesting
way of thinking about it.
Because you might say well how should you
divide up the world and the answer is it depends
on what you want.
It depends on some degree of the world, but
it depends even more on what you want.
So one of the things Luria said was if you
go from the back to the front of the brain
– the front’s the grey part here – what
you see is, roughly speaking, the back half
of the brain does sensory processing, especially
visual processing, and the front half of the
brain does motor processing.
Okay, and so if you look at the back of the
brain the sensory unit there, you see there’s
an auditory area and a visual area.
What’s cool is those overlap to some degree.
So there’s some hypothesis that the place
where the sensory systems overlap are the
parts that are responsible for your experience
of a unified perceptual field.
So here’s an example: imagine the visual
cortex and the auditory cortex overlap in
once place.
Okay, so it would sort of be here, about there
on the left side.
That’s the part you use for silent reading.
Isn’t that cool?
It means your using your eyes as ears.
The way you do that is you use the overlap
between the visual and the auditory cortex.
It’s so cool, you can use your eyes as ears.
So the senses aren’t as separate as people
think.
I used to wear glasses and I couldn’t hear
what people were saying when I wasn’t wearing
them.
The reason for that is I wasn’t watching
their lips.
So a lot of what I was hearing in language
processing was the expression on their face
and the movement of their lips.
I take off my glasses, and I’m deaf.
So anyways, that’s the sensory unit, half
of the brain.
Most of it’s the visual cortex because we’re
visual creatures.
The front half is the motor unit.
Okay, why?
Well because we proceed and act.
So it’s the part of the brain that’s responsible
for zipping you around.
You’ve got voluntary action, right?
You inhabit a nervous system that enables
you to navigate your way around the world.
We’re navigators, fundamentally.
We really are navigators.
You know ants can navigate by the stars?
Think about that.
How the hell can an ant navigate by the stars?
They figured that out by watching ants figure
out how to get back, and then covering up
the sky, and then the ants would wander around
not knowing where they were going.
Yeah there’s lots of things we don’t understand,
I can tell you that.
So anyways, the motor unit.
You’ve got the motor strip.
Now if you touch that with an electrode during
brain surgery then people will either move
or have the impulse to move and you can map
out how the body is represented in the brain
by touching that strip with an electrode,
and that was done by Wilmer Penfield at the
Montreal Neurological Institute.
It was a major move forward in the understanding
of the brain and he did that on epileptics
before surgery, because he didn’t want to
take out parts of the brain that were necessary
so he was trying to figure out what they were
doing.
So that’s the part that enables you to act
voluntarily, and in front of that there’s
the premotor strip.
In front of that there’s the prefrontal
cortex.
Now, what’s cool is that the premotor strip
and the prefrontal cortex grew out of the
motor strip over the course of evolution.
So then you might say, well why do we think?
The answer isn’t so that we can come up
with accurate, objective representations of
the world.
The answer is, so that we can plan what to
do.
What you see, fundamentally, is that as you
move forward in the brain you go from action
to planning action.
So by the time you get to the prefrontal cortex,
let’s say the dorsal-lateral prefrontal
cortex, which is the part of the brain that
you use for abstract thinking, what you’re
basically doing is conjuring up avatars of
yourself in an imaginary world, running them
as simulations in your imagination, and the
collective imagination, that’s what stories
are, running the simulation until the end
to see if you live or die.
If you die then you don’t implement the
simulation.
If you live and thrive then you do implement
the situation.
So – who was it – Carl Popper, philosopher
of science said, the reason we think is so
we can let our thoughts die instead of us.
Right, that’s smart.
That also ties into the death and rebirth
idea, right?
Are you going to die, or are you going to
let your avatars die?
One way of thinking about that is that your
current self is just an avatar.
Now if you understand that, that means you
also understand the relationship between the
Jungian self and the ego.
The ego is an avatar, the self is the thing.
Now I don’t know if you know this, but the
word avatar is actually a theological term.
It’s from Sand script.
An avatar is the form that a God takes on
earth.
It’s pretty cool that that turned into the
term for the thing you use in a video game.
That’s your little, disposable self.
You throw it out there in the world and it
can live or die, and you’re back there like
God just being eternal all along the way.
So, that’s a very, very weird thing.
Anyways, even before we had video games we
were doing that.
We had fiction, we had stories, we had imagination,
and it’s decoupled from our motor systems.
So we can implement these hypothetical instances
of ourselves before we implement them.
That’s kind of how we fight Hydras.
Okay, so you have eight snakes, what do you
do about that?
You have eight potential selves.
You multiply potential selves just as fast
as you multiply snakes.
That’s what evolution does, right?
Let’s say you’ve got a mongoose.
Mongoose like to eat snakes, they’re really
good at it.
They can eat cobras.
Go Mongoose!
So you think, well a mongoose gets killed
by a cobra.
Well that’s not a very good mongoose but
that doesn’t matter because the mongoose
are generating all sorts of mongoose, and
one of them is going to be able to kill the
snake.
That’s all that really matters.
There’s a very funny mouse that lives in
the desert in Arizona.
I like this mouse a lot, and it jumps.
It’s so cool, this mouse, it feeds on scorpions.
How the hell did it learn to do that?
Anyways, it has to teach its young to eat
scorpions, and its quite immune from scorpion
venom, which is quite helpful.
Still it goes out – it’s like you going
out to wrestle a blank crocodile – it’s
like a scorpion is a big thing compared to
a mouse.
The mouse will hop on to the scorpion and
they have this terrible fight, and finally
the mouse tears it a part.
Then it brings it back and feeds it to its
mice babies.
Do you know what it does then?
It goes outside and howls at the moon like
a wolf.
It sounds like a mouse so it’s really squeaky,
but if you slow it down, you know, which is
what you have to do if you want to, for example,
hear mouse vocalizations, because they’re
often much higher than your threshold for
hearing.
Blank that, to hear a rat’s laugh when you
tickle them, you have to slow down their vocalizations
because they laugh at ultrasonic frequencies,
so you have to slow down your vocalizations
to hear them laugh when you tickle them.
Anyways, these damn mice go out in the desert
at night, after eating a scorpion, and they
howl at the moon.
Go mice.
So anyways, back to the brain here.
There are all of these terrible monsters being
generated.
You generate avatars of yourself to cope with
them, and generally used to have to evolve
to do that, but human beings, being the smart
creatures that we are, generated up an environment
in the imagination and then populated it with
imaginary representations of ourselves, and
then tried those out.
Then we implement the ones that we think are
great.
Then you might think, well we’ve been doing
that for a very, very, very long time.
then you might think, maybe we’ve figured
out exactly what thing we should implement,
then we might say well that’s the savior
figures in mythology.
That’s what they are.
What else would they be?
People have been trying to figure out what
the hell we are forever.
The fundamental question, what is reality
made of, is not the fundamental question.
The fundamental question is, how do you act
in the world?
That’s a whole different way of thinking
about the world, but I think, given that I’m
a Darwinian, I think it’s the fundamental
question.
You know, obviously, given what I’ve described
to you so far, you can’t fall in love too
much with your current self.
What if it’s wrong?
Then you should let that sucker die.
Then you might think, well what part of you
is it that doesn’t die when your avatars
die.
Well that’s what Jung called the self.
Let’s say you undergo a personality transformation.
There’s the old you, you’re all naïve
and something comes along and just wallops
you, bang!
Into the underworld, you fall apart.
Then, bang!
There’s a new you.
Maybe a little battle weary, but wiser.
Then you know that one gets walloped out and
into the underworld and up you come again.
Fine, what’s constant across all of those
transformations?
That’s the core element of the person.
That’s what Jung called the self.
Brilliant, it’s so smart.